Kepler-186f has an orbital period of 129.9 days and a planet-to-star radius ratio of 0.021. The additional constraint on stellar density from the transit model allowed us to refine the stellar radius that was previously derived by modeling spectroscopic data. Interior models of cool main-sequence stars such as Kepler-186 show systematic differences from empirically measured stellar properties. To account for discrepancies between the empirically measured radii and those derived from model isochrones at the measured temperature for Kepler-186, we have added a 10% uncertainty in quadrature to our stellar radius and mass estimate.

The Kepler-186 planets do not induce a detectable reflex motion on the host star or dynamically perturb each other so as to induce substantial non-Keplerian transit ephemerides, both of which can be used to help confirm the planetary nature of Keplers planet candidates. Instead, we used a statistical approach to measure the confidence in the planetary interpretation of each candidate planet. We obtained follow-up high-contrast imaging observations using the Keck-II and Gemini-North telescopes to restrict the parameter space of stellar magnitude/separation where a false-positive–inducing star could reside and mimic a planetary transit. No nearby sources were observed in either the Keck-II or Gemini data; the 5 detection limit set the brightness of a false-positive star to be at 0.5 from Kepler-186 and 19.5 at 0.2, where it is the apparent magnitude of a star in the Kepler bandpass.

The probability of finding a background eclipsing binary or planet-hosting star that could mimic a transit in the parameter space not excluded by observations is very low: 0.5% chance relative to the probability that we observe a planet orbiting the target. However, this does not account for the possibility that the planets orbit a fainter bound stellar companion to Kepler-186. Although we have no evidence of any binary companion to the target star, faint unresolved stellar companions to planet host stars do occur. We constrained the density of the host star from the transit model by assuming that all five planets orbit the same star. The 3 upper bound of the marginalized probability density function of stellar density from our simulation is 11. If Kepler-186 and a hypothetical companion coevolved, the lower limit on the stellar mass and brightness of a companion would be respectively.

Given the distance to Kepler-186 of 151, a companion would have to be within a projected distance of 4.2 astronomical units from the target to avoid detection via our follow-up observations. However, a star closer than 1.4 from the primary would cause planets around the fainter star to become unstable. The probability of finding an interloping star with the specific parameters needed to masquerade as a transiting planet is very small relative to the a priori probability that the planets orbit Kepler-186. Therefore, we are confident that all five planets orbit Kepler-186.

Although photometry alone does not yield planet masses, we used planetary thermal evolution models to constrain the composition of the Kepler-186 planets. These theories predict that the composition of planets with radii less than about 1.5 is unlikely to be dominated by gas envelopes. Although a thin envelope around Kepler-186f cannot be entirely ruled out, the planet was probably vulnerable to photoevaporation early in the stars life, when extreme ultraviolet flux from the star was significantly higher. Hence, any envelope that was accreted would probably have been stripped by hydrodynamic mass loss. Although Kepler-186f probably does not have a thick H2-rich atmosphere, a degeneracy remains between the relative amounts of iron, silicate rock, and water, because the planet could hold on to all of these cosmically abundant constituents. Mass estimates for Kepler-186f can therefore range from 0.32 M if composed of pure water/ice to 3.77 M if the planet is pure iron, and an Earth-like composition (about 1/3 iron and 2/3 silicate rock) would give an intermediate mass.

For Kepler-186, the conservative estimate extends from 0.22 to 0.40. The four inner planets are too hot to ever enter. Kepler-186f receives Formula of the intensity of stellar radiation (insolation) received by Earth from the Sun. Despite receiving less energy than Earth, Kepler-186f is within the throughout its orbit. It is difficult for an Earth-sized planet in the habitable zone of an M star to accrete and retain H2O, but being in the outer portion of its stars reduces these difficulties.

The high coplanarity of the planets’ orbits (given by the fact that they all transit the star) suggests that they formed from a protoplanetary disk. The leading theories about the growth of planets include in situ accretion of local material in a disk, collisional growth of inward-migrating planetary embryos (28, 29), or some combination thereof. We performed a suite of n-body simulations of late-stage in situ accretion from a disk of planetary embryos around a star like Kepler-186. We found that a massive initial disk of solid material with a very steep surface density profile is needed to form planets similar to those in the Kepler-186 system. Accretion disks with this much mass so close to their star or with such steep surface density profiles, however, are not commonly observed, suggesting that the Kepler-186 planets either formed from material that underwent an early phase of inward migration while gas was still present in the disk or were somehow perturbed inward after they formed. Regardless, all simulations produced at least one stable planet in between the orbits of planets e and f, in the range from 0.15 to 0.35. The presence of a sixth planet orbiting between e and f is not excluded by the observations; if such a planet were to have a modest inclination of a few degrees with respect to the common plane of the other planets, we would not observe a transit.

Planets that orbit close to their star are subjected to tidal interactions that can drive the planets to an equilibrium rotational state, typically either a spin-orbit resonance or a pseudosynchronousstate in which the planet co-rotates with the star at its closest approach. The proximity of the inner four planets to Kepler-186 suggests that they are probably tidally locked. Kepler-186f, however, is at a large enough distance from the star that uncertainties in the tidal dissipation function preclude any determination of its rotation rate. Regardless, tidal locking (or pseudosynchronous rotation) does not preclude a planet from being habitable. The 5.6 planet probably rotates pseudosynchronously with its star and in addition receives a similar insolation as Kepler-186f. Detailed climate models have shown to be capable of having liquid water on its surface. Taken together, these considerations suggest that the newly discovered planet Kepler-186f is likely to have the properties required to maintain reservoirs of liquid water.